---
title: "Economic Integration and Development from The Perspective of Dependency Theory" 
date: 2021-08-22T19:58:34+05:30
---

International trade and consequent interactions have become a crucial part of economic activity since the last century. The influence of trade has been deemed to be significant for economic development. The process of economic integration has been promoted by the World Trade Organisation especially, on the basis of the same argument. However, not all nations have been benefiting from economic integration and in fact it is possible that the reverse is happening.

While the history of trade goes back to the history of mankind, the advent of international trade is more recent. Due to the industrial revolution and scientific advancements, the production capacity of nations world-wide started increasing during the 19th century. With the imperialistic voyages of nations across the world, trade relations among nations also grew. Different schools of thought came about with regard to the international trade. International trade theories have evolved in accordance to the evolution of economic thought.

Economic integration essentially involves the policy reforms that systematically reduce and eliminate trade barriers among nations and induce sync in monetary and fiscal policies of the nations involved. The effects of trade creation and diversion are part and parcel of any economic integration and is to be perceived via the Ricardian law of comparative advantage and Heckscher Ohlin theory. Both the theories argue that there are opportunity costs involved in the export of commodities and these costs act as determinants of the trade other than the demand and supply side factors. The presence of opportunity costs such as transportation costs and information costs, negatively influence the exports from a nation, which further induces the need for lower protection and lower trade barriers. The question of whether such a trade-off is worth it remains. The fluctuations in terms of trade in such cases can be unpredictable. Thus, it is imperative to indulge in analysis of how economic integration can affect development in different countries.

In order to delineate the benefits of development that can be possibility accrued from economic integration, the concept of terms of trade has to be put into context. Terms of trade is a measure which is used to assess and evaluate the gains received by individual countries by virtue of international trade. It is calculated as the ratio of price of exports to price of imports which can be interpreted as the quantity of imports a nation can afford per unit of exports. An increase in terms of trade is considered to be favourable to the nation’s welfare and a decrease in terms of trade is considered otherwise.

The favourable terms of trade can generate considerable growth and development in a country. When the terms of trade are strong enough, higher quantity of imports can be purchased for the given quantity of exports. This will escalate the number of resources available and hence can be an incentive for growth and increase in national income. Therefore, favourable terms of trade can be regarded as a possible source of capital formation in a country. It is also to be noted that capital thus formed must be invested in such a way that it is conducive to growth and development and not used for consumption alone.

Deteriorating terms of trade can adversely affect the growth and development of a nation, especially in the case of developing nations. Raul Prebisch, used the export statistics of United Kingdom to depict that there is a secular tendency for terms of trade to move against the primary products and terms of trade will deviate in favour of the capital goods and the manufactured goods. Known as the Prebisch-Singer hypothesis of Secular Deterioration of Terms of Trade, provided empirical evidence that terms of trade has been regularly shifting against the welfare of developing countries. This phenomenon happens because the increase in productivity that happens in a developed nation percolates into the labour force in the form of higher income and wages but the developing nations accrue the increase in productivity in the form of reduction in wages. The developed nations are able to enjoy benefits from increase in wages and the reduction in prices in the goods in developing nations. Prebisch suggested that domestic industrialisation or import substitution will be a plausible solution to circumvent deteriorating terms of trade as trade with developed nations would not bring in any gains due to the unfavourable terms of trade. The deterioration in terms of trade will cause the current account balance to be in deficit and hence adversely affect the balance of payment of the concerned nation. Such a tendency for balance of payment deficit can lead to inflation and thereby a degradation in standard of living, a decline in growth rates and increase in debts.

Jacob Viner further introduced the concepts of trade creation and trade diversion to analyse the net effects of any form of economic integration. Any increase in trade towards a less efficient exporter from an efficient exporter due to a preferential trade agreement or economic integration is called trade diversion. Meanwhile trade creation happens when high-cost domestic production is replaced by low-cost imports from members of free trade agreement or economic integration. Any form of economic integration is considered to be beneficial if the trade creation effect exceeds the trade diversion effect.

As in the case of trade diverting economic integration, the countries who aren’t part of the economic integration will experience a reduction in their welfare because the economic resources available to them are not utilized to its maximum capacity or efficiently since trade gets diverted from them. Meanwhile for the countries who are members of the integration would experience both trade creation and diversion and hence the net welfare effect would be ambiguous and welfare will depend upon the intensity of trade creation and trade diversion effects.

 But when the collective terms of trade of the economic integration is considered, a trade diverting economic integration would lead to an improvement in terms of trade since the demand for imports are reduced and supply of its exports are increased for the rest of the world. On the contrary when the collective terms of trade of a trade creating economic integration is considered, since the increase in real income can induce an increase in demand for imports from non-member countries as well or rest of the world, the terms of trade deteriorate. Thus, economic integration can influence the terms of trade of the nations involved and thereby impact the growth and development trajectory of the same.

## **Dependency theory as a theoretical perspective to analyse economic integration**

 The idea of development came about with the advent of capitalism and to be precise when the British bourgeoise was attempting to do away with remanent forces of feudalism (Larrain, 1989). The theories of development were articulated based on the different phases of capitalism such as competitive capitalism, late capitalism etc. Dependency theory is that strata of development theory which had its genesis during the deceleration and crisis phase of capitalism. Dependency theory of underdevelopment was put forth by United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and had Marxist underpinnings to it. The theory propounded that the developed nations which are at the core are exploiting the periphery which are under developed nations to become wealthier and more developed. Santos (1970) explained dependence as “Dependency is a situation in which a certain number of countries have their economy conditioned by the development and expansion of another... placing the dependent countries in a backward position exploited by the dominant countries.” (p.231). Dependency theory was formulated as a resistance towards modernisation theories.

The reason why dependency theory can be used to analyse the development and underdevelopment due to economic integration is predominantly because of the concept of core and periphery in dependency theory. Economic integrations consisting of countries with varying development status, developed and underdeveloped countries can cause a similar trade and production structure as the core and the periphery in the dependency theory. The flight of surplus and unproductive use of surplus that occur within the economic integration can also be explained using the framework of dependency theory.
The very genesis of dependency theory has been from Raul Prebisch’s and other ECLA economists to explain underdevelopment in Latin America with respect to deteriorating terms of trade. The trade creation and trade diversion effects involved in economic integration provides ambiguous and different results in the case of between member countries and between the trade bloc and rest of the world. Even though welfare of a nation said to increase due to trade creation, due to reduction in price of goods, but it might affect the domestic producers. For example, the price of rubber in India went down due to the influx of low-price rubber from ASEAN nations. The reduction in price did benefit the sectors which used the rubber as a raw material but affected the domestic farmers. Even in such a scenario the surplus is being deviated towards another country only because of economic integration. The surplus deflection in the case of trade diversion is obvious. The countries within an economic integration will be forced to buy higher cost goods and services due to the coercion from the economic integration and hence facilitating the flight of surplus to another country.
## **Conclusion** 
Due to the increased economic integration across the world, dependency among nations in general has been on the rise. Even though the discourse of dependency theories lost its significance post the 1990s, the frame work can still be utilised to analyse the course of exploitation that is possible among nations of varying levels of development within an economic integration. Dependency theory is conducive in elucidating the plausible flight of surplus due, loss of sovereignty of nations and unproductive use of surplus in the context of economic integration. 

## **Reference**
- Baran, P. A. (2010). The political economy of growth. New York: Monthly Review Press.
- Larrain, J. (1989). Theories of Development. Polity Press. 
- Salvatore, D. (2013). International economics (11th ed.). Wiley. 
- Santos, T. (1970). The Structure of Dependence. The American Economic Review, 60(2), 231-236. 
Retrieved December 7, 2020, from http://www.jstor.org/stable/1815811
- Valenzuela, J., & Valenzuela, A. (1978). Modernization and Dependency: Alternative Perspectives in the Study of Latin American Underdevelopment. Comparative Politics, 10(4), 
535-557. doi:10.2307/42157



