---
title: "Informal constraints and development policies in India"
description: "Informal constraints in formulating development policies: A brief contextual analysis of India"
date: 2021-07-09T11:05:49+05:30
---

During the course of planning, the constraints that a planner confront are numerous. It is imperative to keep these constraints in mind while envisaging plans to implement. Since, development is multi-dimensional transformation in the socio-economic realm unlike growth, these particular constraints could be formal or informal in nature. Formal constraints in development are those which have lucid or clear-cut solutions to overcome. Formal constraints are detectable and visible, for example deficiency of social overhead capital or decline of savings in the economy. No such unambiguity can be associated with informal constraints. Informal constraints are those constraints derived from the pre-existing socio-political sphere which transcend beyond the formal institutions like laws, rules and contracts. In a developing country like India, it's crucial that these constraints are addressed and few of the many informal constraints are discussed below.

A plethora of traditions and customs exist in India, of which majority doesn't have any scientific backing. The beliefs and superstitions accrued from such cultural norms, prompt both the literates and illiterates alike, to contest development activities that would threaten these beliefs and superstitions. According to Banerjee and Duflo (2011) the immunisation rate in camps set up by an organisation called Sevamandir in rural Udaipur increased by 38% when the parents were offered 2 pounds of dal on completion of immunisation. Earlier parents were reluctant to bring their infants out in the public due to the traditional belief that the infants can die if they catch the evil eye. Many such beliefs and superstitions loom at large even today, but another informal constraint that derive connotations from traditions and beliefs, which has been institutionalised, is caste. Caste has far more severe repercussions. According to a survey conducted by Shah et al. (2006) who surveyed 565 villages in India, it was found that in nearly half of the villages, people belonging to lower castes were denied access to water facilities, in 28% of them they were denied entry into police stations, and in 18% of the villages lower castes were denied access to the road or primary health centres. Allocation of public goods and services become heavily distorted due to practices such as untouchability. Even with affirmative action, according to the 2011 census the literacy rate among scheduled castes and tribes are still way below the national average. Also, gender roles and norms mainly fuelled by traditions can cause distortions in access towards amenities. Hence, gender also can serve as an informal constraint. Similarly, race, ethnicity and religions, especially minority religions are vulnerable at this particular epoch and hence can act as informal constraints.

Utility of consumers are different and can fluctuate due to several factors like budget constraints, availability of alternatives etc. There will always be a huge amount of uncertainty regarding consumer preferences and can act as an informal constraint. Ricardian equivalence is an example for such a case, where in the consumers do not change their consumption pattern when the government attempts to stimulate economy using debt financing as consumers are concerned about future consumption as well. But one of the major counter arguments against Ricardian equivalence is that people are myopic. Myopia serves as another constraint as it leads potential beneficiaries of a policy to make trade-offs and decisions based in short term. Further, tendencies such as bandwagon effect where consumers tend to pursue consumption of goods that others consume, Veblen effect where people aren't interested in low priced goods and snob effect, where consumers prefer goods that aren't preferred by many. Snob effect can be a possible reason for people to not utilise public amenities and resources provided by governments.

Corruption is another informal constraint that needs to be considered. Corruption leads to inefficient allocation of benefits and resources. According to Gupta et al. (1998) corruption has led to reduction in the income of poor by 7.8%. Not only income, corruption can induce allocative inefficiency especially in the distribution of public goods, creating negative externalities, thereby causing unfairness in distribution. Corruption can act as a catalyst for law and order issues as well.

Nevertheless, it is important that informal constraints that are rooted in culture and traditions aren't to be tackled using formal institutions as it wouldn't induce any immediate change in the constraint. Therefore, the ideal solution to surpass informal constraints is to be considerate of them while policies are formulated.

**Reference**

1. Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo. _Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight Global Poverty._ Place of publication not identified: Penguin Books ltd, 2011.
2. Gupta, Sanjeev, Hamid Davoodi, and Rosa Alonso-Terme. &quot;Does Corruption Affect Income Inequality and Poverty?&quot; _IMF Working Papers_ 98, no. 76 (1998). https://doi.org/10.5089/9781451849844.001.
3. Shah, Ghanshyam, Harsh Mander, Sukhdeo Thorat, Satish Deshpande, and Amita Baviskar, Untouchability in Rural India, Sage Publications, New Delhi, 2006.
